NOTES FROM THE LAST ROW
I knew they'd do it.
- Hello, sir. - Yeah.
YEONSEO UNIVERSITY PROGRAMMING COMPETITION RESULTS
KIM SE-YUN, LEE KANG
RUNNER-UP
Mr. Heo.
Jesus Christ!
It's just me. Why are you so surprised?
I was going to tell you, but you've already seen.
Hey.
Why are you runner-up? You knew the problems.
I threw a few of the problems. If we won, we'd be going to the finals.
That wouldn't be fair.
I'm going
To Se-yun's house tomorrow.
To have dinner with them.
I was invited.
I see.
Then our lessons will start this weekend.
Submit your assignment by email before then.
Okay.
See you Saturday, then.
Hey, Lee Kang.
You do know this has to be our secret?
It stays between us.
I know.
- Hello, sir. - Yeah, hi!
The act of writing itself helps you think...
...no complete blueprint in your mind.
It's akin to going on a journey without a map.
Yes, well...
If I push a large door open and enter,
only to find another smaller door,
did I ever really step inside,
or was I outside all along?
A smaller door?
How thoughtful.
How did you know that Yun's mom likes white roses?
Yun told me, actually.
But I could only afford three.
How's the food? Do you like it?
Yes, it's delicious. I'm enjoying all of it.
Thank you for inviting me.
Not at all. We should be the ones thanking you.
Thanks to you, Kang, our Yun won an award.
Runner-up, no less.
We never expected that much.
Please take good care of our Yun.
Kang, do you have any siblings?
Sorry?
Oh, siblings?
It's just me.
So you're an only child.
Where do your parents live? What do they do?
A mother bird's anxious efforts to protect her young.
The second door I encountered.
Goodness, honey.
Why would you ask him that?
I just...
Wait, was that rude of me? Is it not okay to ask?
Kang doesn't talk about himself much. He doesn't like to.
Is that so?
I see. Then I guess that was rude of me.
I'm sorry.
My apologies.
If we're all done eating, should we have dessert?
- Yeah. - Fruit? Or cake?
I don't have a mom.
I needed a key.
A key that could unlock that door.
She left us when I was eight.
My dad got hurt doing construction work and was sick for a long time.
He's in a nursing home now due to alcohol-induced dementia.
Then...
Who did you live with?
- Honey. - It's all right.
I understand your curiosity.
Yes, I'm asking because I'm genuinely worried.
I wonder who took care of him.
Any parental figures.
I did.
I took care of myself
And my dad.
It was just us two until he was hospitalized.
From second grade until I started university.
Goodness.
So,
You studied while taking care of your dad
And still got into Yeonseo?
Kang's grades even got him a full scholarship.
Right?
I worked really hard.
I didn't want people to know my situation.
Nor did I want to be a burden to anyone.
So I studied like crazy between my part-time jobs.
But I don't feel alone anymore.
Because I made a friend.
Someone who's completely different from me.
He's so bright and carefree.
Looking at him is like looking at a clear blue sky without a single cloud.
Yet he also has a big heart.
At first, I was simply fascinated.
Wondering how he grew up to be like that.
But it clicked after I visited his home.
Why he was so different.
It was his family.
Thanks to his loving family
And thanks to him, I think I'm starting to understand
What makes a home
And what family truly means.
I'm learning a little every day.
Oh my.
Goodness, young man.
You thought all that every time you visited our home?
You know what, Kang? You're not alone anymore.
Don't you understand?
I'm saying you can come over whenever you want.
Consider this place your home.
You're practically family now.
I only realized after opening the door
which door it was that I had truly wanted to open.
The door to their hearts.
Only then does the divide between the inside and out disappear.
P.S. I owe all of this to you, Mr. Heo.
None of this would have been possible
if you hadn't slipped me the competition problems.
Thank you, Mr. Heo.
What are you doing here? Why did you read this without my permission?
What was that about competition problems?
You slipped him the problems? What on earth did you do?
What problems?
What are you talking about?
You don't know, do you?
That you wrinkle your nose when you lie.
Enough. I have a lot to do. Get out.
Look. It's written right here at the end.
- Let go. - Hand it here.
Are you insane?
So why lie? What did he mean about competition problems?
Just drop it!
What's it to you?
"What's it to you?"
Please.
Just leave me alone.
Stop trying to know everything.
And from now on, don't come in here without permission.
Or read my students' assignments.
Just mind your own business!
That damn lunatic. Why did he even write that?
Oh my God!
What are you doing? You startled me.
I called your name.
And knocked.
What?
Why are you here?
What are you doing?
I don't recall saying you could lie down.
Yeah.
I did something bad.
Lee Kang, that punk.
They were problems
For his programming competition or whatever.
I stole them and gave them to him.
Don't ask any more questions.
I just had to do it, so I did.
What's that supposed to mean?
But how...
How could you...
Whatever the reason, this isn't like you. Stealing competition problems?
I know that too.
It wasn't like me.
But...
It was thrilling.
What?
That's what made it even more thrilling.
It was something I'd never do.
I'd never felt like that before.
How should I put it?
It felt like jumping over my own fence for the first time in my life.
Are you saying crossing the line made you feel liberated?
Someone as bullheaded as you?
Liberation? Please.
That's just how it felt at the time.
Come to think of it, you have been acting a little strange.
Even now.
You're lying here on my bed.
You can sleep here.
If you want to sleep here, you can. I don't mind.
How long has it been...
Since we started sleeping in separate rooms?
How long?
Twelve years?
No, it's been 13 years.
It was since then.
When we gave up on IVF.
Eat this with Lee Kang when he gets here.
Today is your first real lesson, isn't it?
Okay, thanks.
You should head out now.
No, I don't have anywhere to be today. I'll stay here with you.
- You don't mean in this room, do you? - Is that a problem?
Why would you be here for the lesson?
Why are you getting so worked up? I was just kidding.
Why are you getting all awkward?
- You won't even look at me. - As if.
You haven't changed a bit.
Though I did always find it cute.
Come on. Stop talking nonsense and get out.
He'll be here any minute.
Wait, I have a question.
Did you know about what Lee Kang wrote in his assignment?
About his personal life.
I felt bad for him while reading that part.
I didn't. He and I have never talked about that stuff before.
Never? Not even once?
That's the problem with you.
You're a writer who teaches literature, yet you don't care about people.
What could he learn?
Here we go again!
Please leave.
What's with the flowers?
Since today's lesson is in the morning, I figured your wife would be home.
I couldn't show up empty-handed the first time we met.
But they were expensive.
I could only afford three.
Are you kidding me?
You wrote that in your assignment about the three white roses.
Right, so I did.
But it's true. Roses are expensive.
Whatever.
Let me ask.
What you wrote about your life in your assignment,
Is it true?
Are you asking if the narrator in my assignment and the author
Are the same person?
Then what?
You made that up?
Not exactly, but I don't know.
They could be the same yet different, you know?
Is the narrator in your novel the same person as the author?
My novel?
Yes.
Your novel.
TWELVE WOMEN
I stumbled upon it at a secondhand bookstore.
I haven't finished it yet,
But it seems to be about a man who wanders between 12 different women.
Let's stop talking about this book.
This book is...
Too complex for you to understand yet.
Actually, no one can understand it.
No. Although it's a bit complex, I'm finding it interesting.
So is the narrator in this novel the same person as the author?
Well?
I'm dying to know.
Yeah.
Just as you said...
The author and the narrator can indeed be identical,
Or they can be different.
The twelve women
Were mere figments of my imagination.
The truth is, it was about one woman.
Sorry?
What was that?
Enough.
Let's stop talking about narrators.
Let's start the lesson. Put that away.
- No, what did you just say? - Put it away, please.
I actually have something to tell you before we start the lesson.
Some good news.
I'm moving
Into Se-yun's house.
Moving in?
It came up when we were eating after a game of basketball.
- Move in? - Yeah, move in.
Ever since I heard about you living in that budget micro-unit.
It's been on my mind.
Sorry, I told him about your place.
You wouldn't be a burden, so just come live with us, okay?
His sister just happens to be moving out, so we have a spare room.
And Yun's mom is also on board, of course.
As adults, it's our duty and reward
To support smart kids like you.
So don't worry about it. Just move in, okay?
Eat up.
Consider it your home and come live with us.
And
You agreed?
Of course.
Saving on rent is a huge deal for me.
And it'd be good for our lessons too.
I could write about what I see and feel every day.
Still, letting someone into their home can't be an easy thing for them.
You think I don't know that? That's what makes Mr. Kim so amazing.
Se-yun told me later
That his mom only agreed because his dad was so adamant.
Se-yun says he respects his dad more than anyone else in the world.
He's strong yet considerate
And has a young, flexible mindset.
Mr. Kim is a really admirable guy.
I think he's the first adult I've met...
That I want to be like.
You've got a long way to go if you want to be a writer.
Sorry?
You're too hasty to make up your mind about people.
And your judgment is shallow and simple.
You think he's great, amazing, and you want to be like him
Just because of that one thing?
All right, fine.
You're still young, so I guess it's understandable.
But...
You should know this.
So far, you've only seen that man and his family at a surface level.
A perfect middle-class family that lacks nothing.
It's obvious and cliché. A textbook example.
Do you know why that is? Because that's how you want to see them.
That's what you want them to be.
When it comes to people,
What matters isn't who they are.
It's their relationships. That's what you need to look out for.
That's the only way to see their true selves.
Since you've already decided to move in...
For now...
Start with Mr. Kim and study his various relationships.
Observe them closely.
This is your first assignment.
Okay.
Eat up.
Weren't you just envious of that dad?
What do you mean "envious"?
Well,
Because Lee Kang kept complimenting him,
Saying he was the first adult he wanted to be like.
Maybe you were just envious.
Am I wrong?
Hey, wait.
What do you take me for? Do you think I'm that childish?
If not, then fine. That's just what it sounded like to me.
Were you eavesdropping again? How much did you hear?
I didn't mean to listen in.
I just caught bits here and there.
I was just saying what needed to be said.
He was being too one-sided, so I restored balance, as his teacher.
That's true.
To someone who's starved for attention, such kindness can feel huge.
And it is a pretty big deal.
You could try being nicer to him too.
I know you want him to look up to you as an adult.
That Lee Kang kid is actually pretty cute.
He has a peculiar charm.
But doesn't he look familiar?
Earlier, when I first saw him...
Hello, nice to meet you.
Oh my, you shouldn't have.
It's nice to meet you. Come on in.
I don't know.
So did Lee Kang say whether it was true or not?
What he wrote in his assignment.
Why are you so interested?
Ever the therapist.
I know, right?
It keeps weighing on my mind.
I wonder if his childhood was even harder than his writing implies,
Given his deflection.
Who knows what that kid is thinking?
You don't think he'll do something strange at that house, do you?
Never mind. It's just the therapist in me.
Something strange?
Like what?
Well, you know how people are.
They can only endure
Because they have people who believe in them and support them.
And their sense of ethics tends to be determined by those relationships.
It seems like he hasn't had anyone like that in his life.
I'm just concerned.
Lonely people can become a dangerous presence
When put in certain situations.
It's sad.
A dangerous presence?
Yes.
What are you doing?
Mr. Heo, look here.
I made this game. Want to take a look?
You press down to move forward and double-click to do this.
Some dream.
Hello, I'm Lee Kang--
There you are. Well done for making it here.
Here. Let me.
The reason a trip is considered a trip...
is because you have a home to return to.
But this is your sister's room.
I told you she moved out. She only comes home a few times a year.
It's your room now.
All yours.
Are you sure you'll be okay here? We don't even use this room.
It's fine.
We should clear some of the junk out.
And because you have your own room to return to.
I thought it'd upset her if her room was gone.
It was an easy decision when I put myself in her shoes.
Goodness, how sweet of you.
And you're so considerate.
You've never even met her.
It's still a hundred times better than my old place. I couldn't be happier.
All right, then. A welcome toast.
Lee Kang,
Welcome to the family.
Welcome.
Welcome!
Speak of the devil.
- It's Jeong-hu. - Of course it is.
I'm so nice, I'm letting you keep your room.
Whatever. I told you I don't care.
This is my room and my home now.
There you go again.
You're going to make your dad cry. He'll start crying from heartbreak.
That's right, kid. You're not family anymore.
Just say hi. This is my friend.
- Lee Kang? - Hello.
Hey. Yun's told me so much about you. I feel like we've already met.
- See you around. - Sure.
- Don't skip any meals. - Bye.
It's because you have people who welcome you when you're back.
Dad!
Does that mean I can now
go on a trip too?
Can I finally set off on a trip of my own?
What are you looking at, jerk?
Thanks to you, I now have more work to do.
The one person who's ruining the thrill of a new trip.
I heard you lived in a budget micro-unit.
Guess you struck gold.
Her name is Seon Min-hui.
She's in her early-thirties, maybe?
She comes to work three times a week.
Oh my gosh! Oh dear.
Sorry.
You should be more careful.
It's okay. I'll do it.
She's the only person who hates that I moved into this house.
You can't throw your cigarette butts in the flower bed. This is yours, right?
It isn't.
It's not mine, it's his.
You know, that friend of Se-yun's. Lee Kang.
I saw him do it.
What are you talking about? Now you're even telling lies?
Here, there's clearly lipstick on it.
Besides, our kids don't smoke.
As smoking is a preference, I can't do anything about it, but still.
I don't want anyone smoking in my home.
It's bad for the flowers too.
Please don't, okay?
What?
Bad for the flowers, you say?
Just hire someone else.
Why are you putting up with her?
I can tell her for you if you find it hard.
Oh, I don't know.
I don't know what to do with her.
I felt bad for her because she's a single mother.
But if I fire her,
I couldn't face the president of our church's volunteer group.
They introduced her to me.
You're overthinking things so much, it's making you cranky.
Legs here.
Still,
She might be a bit unruly,
But her side dishes are incredible.
Our Yun devours all the side dishes Min-hui makes.
That's good.
That feels so good. That's the spot.
Here?
I'm good at this, right?
You sure are.
You get better by the day.
You're as good as any masseuse.
So,
Please don't think too much.
Don't let useless thoughts clutter your mind, okay?
The most important thing to me is that you feel at peace, okay?
In our family,
Nothing matters more than that.
Oh, all right.
I can't say anything to you without you worrying.
You know the kids are home, right?
So what if they are?
You didn't...
Listen in on that, did you?
No, Se-yun called me
Not long after that.
Why do you look so disappointed?
Sorry?
Hey.
Don't.
That's voyeurism, you know.
I told you to be an observer, not a voyeur.
That's unacceptable.
What's the difference?
The difference, you punk...
Hold on.
What are you doing?
Deliberately spying on and eavesdropping on people.
Anyway, the moment you start indulging in it, it becomes voyeurism.
I didn't see them on purpose.
It just happened.
You sly bastard.
Do you honestly think that's believable?
Absolutely not. Observation only.
Anyway, Mr. Kim really loves his wife.
That's my point.
From what I've observed,
The two of them frequently share small touches.
Do you think two people being touchy-feely always means it's love?
If it's not love, what is it?
Okay, yeah. You're still young, so you might see that as love.
But you see, with married couples...
It could very well be a desperate attempt
To overcome the cold tedium
That has settled over time.
What am I even saying right now?
Anyway, married couples are complicated, okay?
Are you talking about yourself?
What?
Well, I'm just wondering how things are with you and your wife.
Why are you curious about that?
You little punk.
You stepped on the line. Don't cross it.
Hey, tell me more about that housekeeper.
No, I don't want to.
I don't want to talk about her.
Why not?
Does she keep harassing you?
Tell me about you instead. Please?
Do the two of you...
Love each other?
How do we seem to you? Do we look like we're in love?
Why would you ask something like that?
You're talking nonsense and to a little kid at that.
What do you mean "a little kid"? He's an adult now.
And he's at the age where he'd be curious about these things, right?
It seems like you love Mr. Heo,
But I'm not sure about Mr. Heo.
You're right. I always wonder about him too.
You tell me. Do you love me?
Hey.
Stop eating. Put that down.
What are you doing? Our lesson ended ages ago.
Hurry on home.
What's your deal? I ordered this specifically for Kang.
Take your time and eat up.
You should have some too.
You too, Mr. Heo.
I am.
Then maybe I'll try a piece too.
No, I need to lose weight.
You're trying to lose weight?
But you're already so beautiful.
Oh my, is that right?
Thank you. You're the only one who compliments me like that.
What a load of crap.
The truth is, I think Mr. Heo loves you too.
Maybe his love is so deep that it's invisible.
You think so?
What makes you think that?
I finished reading Mr. Heo's book.
After reading it, I realized who the one woman is.
The one woman?
Mr. Heo told me in a previous lesson
That the 12 women are just symbolic, and it's actually about one woman.
When did I say that?
You said that.
You said it quietly, but I definitely heard you.
I'm guessing that one woman
Is Ms. Jo, of course.
Right?
One woman?
Hey, don't pay any mind to what that kid said as a joke.
That kid was just spouting nonsense.
Don't worry about it.
Worry? Please.
Your age-old first love? What a laugh.
What? First love?
It's that woman.
The name that keeps coming up in your old draft notes.
It must be her.
That's all in the past. Ancient history.
What does any of that matter now?
Yeah, I didn't say anything about it.
Still,
I didn't know all 12 women were her.
Then again, what do I even know about you?
Lee Kang.
That little smart-ass, I swear...
It doesn't always take a typhoon to sway a tree.
Some trees can be uprooted
with a mere passing breeze.
Why do you keep suspecting me?
I told you, I didn't steal it!
Why are you lying to me again when I found it right here?
Then how else would it have ended up in here?
How should I know?
And also,
Why would you go through my bag without permission?
I'm sorry about that.
But do you really think I wanted to look?
I searched everywhere. I was at my wits' end!
Why is it pouring all of a sudden?
So what if your damn scarf is designer?
If you keep doubting me like this,
I won't be able to work here anymore.
I quit.
What's the matter this time?
Well,
Min-hui stole my new scarf...
Mom!
Are you okay?
- Should I bring you your sedatives? - Yeah, get me my meds.
Yeah, okay.
This is why I told you not to stress and just hire someone else!
Damn it.
That's it. I'll have a firm word with her.
Honey...
Are you out of your mind?
You've gone beyond being a voyeur and are actually messing with them now?
You're telling me
You snuck the scarf in her bag?
I did,
But she messed with me first.
She spilled drinks on me on purpose and kept belittling me.
You think this is on the same level?
So, what?
You wanted to get her fired?
No, I was just pulling a prank--
A prank? What do you mean "prank"?
What you did
Was frame someone as a thief.
You crossed a line.
I wouldn't have done that
If she hadn't messed with me.
You punk, you really...
You go around causing trouble with every family you visit!
Every family?
Look, kid, what I mean is...
I told you over and over again, didn't I?
I told you to observe relationships, not to go around sparking conflict.
Right?
Meddling and starting arguments.
A writer shouldn't do that.
After our last lesson, did you argue with your wife because of what I...
Is that why we're here today for--
Argue? We didn't argue! Don't act like you know everything!
Anyway,
Our lessons will take place here from now on. Period.
Yes, sir.
Man, I'm exhausted.
Let's call it a day. We'll continue next time.
But, Mr. Heo,
I learned a shocking truth.
I was going to write it, but I wanted to tell you in person.
You were right, Mr. Heo.
You can't judge a person by what you see.
Keep it short.
There's something going on between Mr. Kim and Min-hui.
That day...
I saw them that day.
Mr. Kim stepped outside, saying he'd have a firm word with Min-hui, but...
they looked like a couple.
Then Se-yun's dad grabbed her, and they went into the garage.
So I secretly followed them, and I saw... I saw...
The car was shaking.
Shaking like this. What else could that mean?
Hey!
Is this why you moved in?
To spy on them and make assumptions?
Do you think I'm giving you these lessons so I can listen to this bullshit?
No, I really saw it!
You saw it? Really?
You said you felt dizzy that day. Are you sure you saw that?
Yes, of course I saw...
Lee Kang.
What you're saying right now
Is no different from indiscriminately swinging a hammer at people.
Just like in that game you made.
That unethical and irresponsible attitude of yours.
Caring only for entertainment regardless of the truth!
But the thing is...
Literature is not a game.
Your attitude must be sincere. That's of the utmost importance.
In order to write a good story,
You have to be a decent human being.
Got it?
I think you were right.
Lee Kang, that punk.
I think there's something off about that bastard.
I think I need to stop the lessons.
Isn't that why you liked him? Because he was stimulating?
I quite like him.
What the heck?
You said he was dangerous and all that.
That was your takeaway?
Such poor comprehension skills.
What?
I was just briefly worried.
But I'm not worried anymore.
He seems more normal than you.
What? Are you still...
Am I still what?
I have a lot of reports to write. Please leave.
LEE KANG
What is it?
Were you sleeping?
I'm so sorry, but I got into an accident.
I need a guardian, so could you...
Could you please come here?
What? An accident?
You'll get the details when you're here. It's urgent, so please hurry.
But
Why did you contact me?
You were the first person who came to mind.
I could have called Mr. Kim,
but still, I'd like for you to come.
Fine. Where are you?
What's going on?
What accident, exactly?
I'm sorry.
The truth is...
Did you lie to me?
I'll tell you everything.
The truth is...
Look over there.
Just now,
Mr. Kim and Min-hui went into that hotel.
I saw them by chance and followed them.
I wanted you to see it for yourself,
Since you wouldn't believe me.
Mr. Heo!
I told you, I saw them! Why won't you believe me?
Fine, you punk!
Let's say you did see them. So what?
What does such vulgar gossip have to do with me?
You dragged me here for this crap, by lying, no less?
I'm done with you.
I can't waste any more of my time
On this foolishness.
I don't need this. Our lessons are over.
Over!
Oh my God!
What the...
Oh no, she's bleeding. Hurry!
That's her.
Min-hui.
What did you say?
An ambulance. Hurry!
That's Mr. Kim.
- She's bleeding. - Where?
That...
That man is...
Mr. Kim?
Se-yun's dad?
Yes.
That man...
Is Mr. Kim?
So you're Se-yun's new friend. Nice to meet you. Lee Kang, right?
Kim Su-hun.
Kim Su-hun...
Is Se-yun's dad?
NOTES FROM THE LAST ROW
Subtitle translation by: Jimin Choi